# Sail
Damage from sea disaster is no less than a wildfire. No ship owner has enough money to compensate, so they all have to buy P&I insurance. A crude oil tanker can have a deadweight of up to 550 thousand metric tons. If it sank then it was a terrible disaster.

Sail solution is a machine learning application that uses the IBM Cloud platform. This is a deep learning program with superparameter optimization experiment. The neural network is trained and deployed through IBM Watson Machine Learning CLI commands. The client program runs on a notebook to predict the risk, sending the payload data to the trained model via a Python function. This function is a Python closure that performs two tasks:
- Convert raw input data from users as human-readable strings to model deployment payload format.
- Convert the classification index data that is returned by the model to human-readable text that describes the level of risk.

Model data is a .csv file with 3000 examples, of which 2700 examples are for training and 300 examples are for testing. The experiment trains 4 training runs simultaneously and the model of the best-performing training run achieves test accuracy of over 98%.

The risk depends mainly on the weather. When predicting, the weather factor is taken from the IBM Business Weather Channel via API key. The other 11 elements are flag, ship type, deadweight, shipbuilding year, crew nationality, cargo, sailing area, season, number of sailing days, bill of lading quality and PSC safety inspection status (PSC - Port State Control). Please see http://www.imo.org/en/OurWork/MSAS/Pages/PortStateControl.aspx for more details.

All 12 factors affect maritime risks. There are 20 types of cargoes in the example set. Cargoes such as steel coils, heavy-lift, equipment, grain in bulk, log wood, petroleum products, chemicals are dangerous for ships than other types. But their level of danger depends on other factors. For example, for steel coils, on Japanese ships with Japanese crew, because these crew members are highly responsible, the goods are securely lashed, not moved and therefore do not cause lossing safety. New ships are usually safer than old ones. The longer the sailing time, the higher the risk. Traditional risk analysis systems usually consider 5-days, 10-days periods to mark a new level of risk. Interestingly, the Sail solution accepts calculations for any number of days. Bill of lading quality is also an important factor, but they are usually only meaningful for flagged vessels of underdeveloped countries. The ship owners are not interested in or accepting transport contracts but reducing the expense of dunnage thus causing a high risk of sinking. Many other details are not presented here because they are beyond 500 words.

The Sail solution can be applied to calculate maritime risks in general, to use for maritime accident investigation agencies, can be applied for maritime risk calculations to insurance sellers and other cases such as used as a reference factor in freight calculation.
